This is Debbie Parks interviewing Mr. C.A. Bonnen
for the History of College Station Project, March
25th, 1983, at Mr. Bonnen's house, Side 1.
I think you can. I'd like to start with some
background information. Where were you born?
And
were your parents from Illinois? What did they do
for a living?
So you lived on a farm? What kind of jobs did you do
around the farm?
doing chores and field work and so on. I didn't have
to be somewhat older than Mary Hampton to do field
work.
After I finished high school, I was never on the
farm anymore. What kind of education did you
receive?
And then I was out for a year. And then I went to the
University of Illinois.
I got two degrees there, a BS and an MS. And after
that, I went
to the University of California for a year. Did you
get your PhD? No. see it as 1933 and
all these federal jobs developed and I
represented the experiment
What
were your degrees in? One of my first degrees was
BS. And
you worked on experiment stations that were...
They were federally funded, is that right? But
they were in association with different
colleges? Yeah.
So long ago. 30
years. 50 years. 50 years.
Well, what brought you to the College Station
area? What's that? What brought you to the College
Station area? Yeah, oh, for the job. And what job
was that? Was
it a teaching position?
Oh,
I see. And then later on you taught at the college?
Well, almost from the start I taught one course
and then that was my research.
When you came to the College Station area, what
year was that? 1927.
Where did you live?
For two years out there in Bryan, you couldn't find
a place out here. There was a small scattering of
houses south of the campus. And two years later, we
moved. And they told us about the house they were
living in. And so we got out here south of the
campus. In 1929? What was it?
We came to Bryan in 25, I think, 27 when we moved out
here on campus. Where did you live? What street was
it on?
Well,
do you remember
what subdivision it was in? Was it in College Park?
College Park, yeah. Do you remember any
communities that had developed out here?
a number of houses in what we called College Park
and West Park.
This section hadn't been developed
yet. We bought a lot here in about 1934 or 1935 and
built this house in 1936. What subdivision is
this? This is...
Is this Oakwood? Yeah. Oakwood. Do you remember
any rural settlements out towards south of town?
Perhaps in...
Yeah, no. This is all country. I don't know. Were
there any farmers on the farmland? Do you remember
any specific communities?
Do you remember any communities in this area?
Well, the, what we now call the North Gate,
it was the first developed,
such as it was. And
then south, to the south there was the Oakwood
community. And
there was a development west of here.
I think it would be the
See, this is the Oakwood,
West Park or whatever it is. Around what used to be
the lake, there's a stream that runs through
there. I don't know if you ever noticed it. Yeah.
Well, that was the lake at one time. And the child
around him. Oh, really? And there was a diving
board extended. I don't know if you ever noticed
that. Embankment runs across there now, but there
was a diving board off of that embankment. And a
small child went out on the diving board and fell
into the lake and ground. And there were several
children with her. You know how children are. They
don't know what to do.
They're grand circles around here. There
were people living just a short distance.
When
you lived in the subdivisions before
incorporation, How did you pay for your
utilities?
Did you pay? I don't know. There was a corporation,
maybe
about five or six men, that developed
these houses south of campus.
was incorporated.
And these men ran the corporation and
made
all the decisions about it and so forth before they
were born. Before 1938, the town college station
was incorporated. Then you paid them for the
utilities? Okay.
What were the streets like at that point?
Well, just gravel roadways and all. Okay. Do you
remember where the sewer plant was located?
I'd like to talk about incorporation. Do you
remember some of the factors that brought about
the incorporation of College Station? Well,
that history is rather interesting because it
shows how aggressive Bryan was. That's when they
moved right out almost to College Station and took
in all that. See, at one time, our school district
Went clear to the Y, if you know where that is, where
the roads come together and divide. Yes. All that
country here into the Y was in our school district.
which, of course, takes a little time. They
immediately moved down, took in all that
territory between here and there. And, of course,
they weren't able to go anywhere else. There
wasn't any other place for us to go but Sound.
And, of course, they,
what do you call it? They creeped around. It's an
area that's been flooded once in a while. It's east
of here. Oh, it's east of here. Is it Carter Creek?
Carter Creek, yeah.
We
have
to go across that to, you know, where they
developed that.
Where this big shopping center is out east here.
Oh, yes, Post Oak. Post Oak, Bookwood, Post Oak
Mall. That's a recent development.
Yes, I can imagine. So as far as incorporation was
concerned, the people decided that they wanted a
city? Well,
they knew if they didn't incorporate,
Brian would eventually incorporate the whole
thing and it wouldn't get any bigger. the railroad
station in the city of Bryan. So they were afraid.
Yeah. We had good reason to be afraid of that. Bryan
has fought the development around the campus here
from the beginning.
You're talking to someone who has lived through
all that and feels pretty strong about it. Well,
that's what I'd like to talk about. People around
here were afraid that Brian would. Oh, yeah. Brian
was very aggressive. And of course, while we were
unincorporated by taking anything they wanted. I
imagine the college kept them incorporating
campus. So
we decided that the only thing we could do was to
incorporate them. They immediately
incorporated all the development community. And
at that time, our school district went right to the
Y, where the Y are.
why didn't people want to be annexed into Bryan?
Well, there's a lot of history back to that. You
just got to...
Of course, in the beginning, there was nothing but
a railroad station here and the campus. And...
The city of Bryan kept growing closer all the time.
And the minute we decided to incorporate, and of
course that takes a certain amount of time, they
incorporated all the land north of campus.
I don't know what the
position of the regents was at that time, but
apparently they couldn't incorporate the
campus.
So they came about as close as they could come with
their incorporation.
Of course, the village, it took them longer to
incorporate themselves than it would have been.
Brian just, all they have to do is, we're moving
here. This is open territory, you see. Well, had
the community developed some kind of feeling of a
separate... Oh, yes. Yeah, very distinctly so.
And of course, if you're a part of Bryan, it took in
all the Mexicans and Negroes and all that sort of
thing, and this is pretty much it. college
community. And so you wanted to be your own
separate community.
Sure. Who were the organizers of incorporation?
Do you remember? Well, I can remember two of them.
Mr. Gabbard, my next door neighbor here, who is
dead now, and George Wilcox, who moved away from
the community. I think he moved to Dallas or
someplace like that. Not
recently, but fairly so. And then a fellow by the
name of Benny was mayor and was killed shortly
after that. Those three are the only ones I recall.
I'm sure you can get the names of the rest of them.
Well, how did they go about encouraging
incorporation?
Well, I didn't have anything to do with that. Mr.
Gabbard was
interested in the city, or at least that's what we
agreed on. I went. My activities were involved
with the school. I had six children and he felt like
it. I would have more interest in the school than he
would have. So
we divided the
They had a business up between the school and the
city. I went to the school and he went to the city.
Were there meetings? Did y'all have meetings to
discuss? Oh, yeah. A lot of meetings.
I can't tell you much about them. Where were they
held?
Well, we had a school out here.
The
meetings were either in a public building or in the
home of one of the persons who were in the meetings.
It was all very primitive, you know. Was it kind of
word of mouth, or did they post signs that there
would be a meeting?
I don't remember about that. Do
you remember the petition that was circulated to
ask for an election? No, I don't remember that. How
would you say the board of directors or the faculty
on campus felt about being incorporated?
I wasn't aware of any protest or anything like
that. Were they in favor then? They must have been.
You brought up the fact that Dr. Benny was one of the
active members, and he became the first mayor. Can
you give me any information about him, why he was
interested in developing the city?
Well, I just know that that group initiated the,
the activity that led to the incorporation. I
don't
know anything about their position and so on. They
must have all been for it because they got together
and arranged for the incorporation. Do you know
anything about the man? Can you remember anything
about him? Benny? Not much. He was killed right
after he was, shortly after he was elected mayor.
Right out the east gate.
Probably had his mind on something and drove out
there. What's that? It was a car accident? Yeah.
What happened with another car? I presume so. It
was right there at the east gate and he must have
driven out into the, see there wasn't much traffic
here then and he probably had his mind on
something. And he was in an accident? Well,
apparently you were head of a committee after he
was in the accident to try to find or to encourage
somebody else to run for mayor. No, I hadn't. See,
all my activities have been with the school. Do you
remember talking to Frank Anderson about running
for mayor?
No, I don't think I had anything to do with that.
He's a good friend of mine. I'm sure I voted for him
and so on.
I
didn't take much of an active part in the city
itself or what they did or what they were going to do
and that sort of thing. I left that to my neighbor,
Mr. Gerber.
Mr. Anderson was the second mayor, and could you
tell me why people would want him for mayor? What
qualities he had? He was an outstanding
individual.
See,
he came here.
head of the A&M track team
shortly after he came and .
stood for than I do, but I had a son on the track team,
and
he was a very sincere, very fine individual. In
fact, they named the A&M track
Anderson Track now. That's right, I saw that.
And that was well justified.
I'd like to talk about the education, the public
school system in College Station. You were on the
school board for several years. Do you remember
what years you served the school board? Well,
the school was was on the campus until 1940,
February 1940. And
Bill Sparks, I don't know whether you ever heard of
him or not, but he was a real estate man and a very
fine individual. And he and I raised the money.
build the first school off the campus. Off the
campus? I don't remember. There were a
lot of little country schools around and they were
all consolidated with College Station School.
I don't remember anything about that. It was done
before I came on the school board. See, I
helped raise the money for the movement of the
school, the campus, and then in 44 I was elected to
the school board. And how long did you serve? until
1959, 44 to 59, 15 years. Do you know of any of the
other communities that were consolidated with
College Station? Well, all these little
districts around us were.
There you go. I think after they were
consolidated, there wasn't anything but our
school and Wellvern and then down in the end of the
county. And they were eventually taken into the
Navasota School District.
What's the name of the little town down below?
Milliken. Milliken. Milliken. That was all taken
in. They were closer to Navasota than they were to
Do you remember the school on campus? Yeah, it was
a, stuck, stuck a building
in a part of what is now the
where the Aggies lived, the dormitory. It was a
stucco building. I
imagine there was five or six rooms in it. And then
there was an old dormitory on the campus. I forget
the name of it, but you can find out what it was.
Was it Pfeiffer? Pfeiffer Hall, that's right.
Do you remember what they called a teacherage, a
place where teachers lived? No, I don't remember
that. I saw a reference to that and wondered about
it. I think that must have been before I came here.
Did professors teach in the school that was on
campus?
In the public school? No. No. Your children went to
the school that was on campus, is that right?
Can you tell me a little bit about, you said that you
helped raise the money to locate the school off
campus. Can you tell me a little bit about that?
All I remember about it was that Bill Sparks and I
were appointed to the job of raising this money.
See we had no
This is College Station because it has the name The
Depot. That's where we got our name.
Did you not have any taxes? Did you have taxes?
Not until we were incorporated. So you and Mr.
Sparks had to raise the money, is that right? We had
to double the valuations on practically all
property to get the basis for the money that was
used for the school. But this is not before you got
the school moved off campus, was it?
How is that again? What I'm wondering is that the
school was located on campus, and you and Mr.
Sparks and other men were interested in getting it
off campus. Well, we were ordered off the campus.
The university ordered us off the campus. Okay,
and there was a school board, and how did they have
money to run the school? I mean, apparently you
needed to raise the money to move the school off
campus. Could you tax the people at that time? I
don't remember about that. Okay, so the school
ordered you off. In the spring semester of 1943. in
1940.
So you and Mr. Sparks helped raise the money to
locate the school. Do you remember the people,
were the people submitting money to buy land? Is
that what it was?
I'm sorry to be so slow.
You get to be 86 years old. I did pretty well when I
was 85, but since then I've
been pretty slow at recalling things.
You know, it's heck to be old. I can imagine. But,
you know, that's fine. Quite all right.
As I can remember in my research, money was donated
and the Hollick Lane track was bought.
You mean that's south of campus here? Mm-hmm.
Well, a man by the name of Clark, F.D. Clark, I think
it was, who was college prof, and also a real estate
man. And he developed all this out of the campus. He
was of that group that developed College Park and
then on south.
That's about all I remember about it. It was in the
hands of people like that who had charges of
development. Remember, this was a comparatively
unorganized community.
And
there was five or six men that formed a corporation
that
all the land west of
this development here.
And then Burgess and Sparks and
another fellow whose name I don't recall, but who
was killed shortly after they were organized.
He was killed in an automobile accident south of
here. And Sparks and Burgess were at a card party
that night. And they got word while they were at the
card party that
And he was killed. And
Burgess said, George, I just bought him out this
morning. And that's the first sparks Neil got. And
the sparks
cut loose from Burgess and went over here and
developed across the highway. College Hills
Estate?
It
wasn't Redmond. Mr. Redmond built that. Redmond
Terrace.
All these things happen that are run by somebody
else that I didn't have anything to do with. It's
hard to remember. It's hard to recall.
See,
Brian came out and incorporated
most of that land
where they are now and cut us off there.
Brian seemed to have the, they were incorporated
and had all the knowledge of these things.
take advantage of us whenever they wanted to. You
can probably understand why we feel so bad about
them.
We wouldn't give them a meal unless we had to. Let me
stop right here.